ReadMe Introduction for Smartphones Tidy Dataset
===================
*updated June 9, 2015*

----------
This dataset is a processed and cleaned extraction from "The Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Data Set" hosted by the UCI Machine Learning Repository, and represents a Human Activity Recognition database built from the recordings of 30 subjects performing activities of daily living (ADL) while carrying a waist-mounted smartphone with embedded inertial sensors. [Link: <i class="icon-folder-open"></i>](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones)

The original data was generated by experiments carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities, and wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

From the original dataset, the following modifications were applied:

 1. "test" and "train" datasets were merged (appended) to create a
    single database. 
    
 2. Variables measuring "standard deviation (STD)" and
    "mean" were extracted based on their original column names, and averaged across each subject and
    activity.
    
 3. Descriptive labels were applied, the data was sorted and exported as a separate data file.

----------
Objectives
-------------
The goal of this repository is to create a combined, reduced, and analyzed dataset based upon the "The Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Data Set", and apply "tidy data" principles to make the resulting dataset easy to use.

----------
Included Files and Scripts
-------------
This repository consists of the following files and scripts:
 1. **README.md** *(this file)*
 2. **CodeBook.md** *(descriptions of variables)*
 3. **run_analysis.R** *(execution script)*
 5. **activity_labels.txt** *(support table)*

Upon execution, the script will generate the file "**smartphones_tidy.txt**" which contains the tidied and modified dataset.

----------
Required Packages
-------------
This script requires the "data.table" R package.  If you do not have this package installed, please install it before executing the script with the command:
```
install.packages("data.table")
```

----------
Instructions
-------------
Please follow these instructions for the script to execute correctly.

 1. Download the "The Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Data Set" dataset from the UCI Machine Learning Repository, and extract it (unzip it) to your working R folder [Link: <i class="icon-folder-open"></i>](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones).
 2. Set your current working directory to be *the same directory that contains your extracted raw data set*.  Do not set your working directory to be the extracted directory itself.  Don't worry - if you execute the script from the wrong directory, it will generate an error message and interrupt gracefully.
 3. Execute the following command:

```
source("run_analysis.R")
```

These instructions will create a merged and tidied dataset using the most recent raw data from the UCI Machine Learning Repository, titled "**smartphones_tidy.txt**" and saved in the current working directory.

----------
Data Transformations
-------------
This script makes a number of alterations to the original dataset.

----------

Author
-------------
This script was created by Guy Hagen in support of the John Hopkins "Data Cleaning" course.  

The original smartphone activity data is published as:
*Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. A Public Domain Dataset for Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones. 21th European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning, ESANN 2013. Bruges, Belgium 24-26 April 2013.*